Echelon Survey Scoring Architecture

Precompiled Scorers + Typed Expression Trees for F# WebAssembly

Status: Design approach for preservation and later implementation
Scope: Scoring architecture only. This document does not prescribe an
immediate rewrite of the existing survey JSON.

1. Purpose

Echelon surveys need to support different scoring models while allowing
the scoring rules to travel with the survey definition. The runtime will
be an F# WebAssembly application.

The proposed architecture is deliberately hybrid:

1.  Common scoring models are implemented as precompiled F# functions.
2.  Common models may accept declarative parameters from the survey.
3.  Truly survey-specific scoring is represented as a small, typed
    expression tree stored as data with the survey and interpreted by
    precompiled F# code.
4.  Arbitrary executable code is never stored in a survey.

This provides flexibility without making every survey a program.

2. Evidence from the Current Surveys

The current files already show at least two distinct scoring shapes.

-   The Agile assessment files contain 28 sections and 403 entries each.
    Their questions use yesNoInProgress, while entries carry intrinsic
    scores such as -1, 1, 2, and 3.
-   The UX assessment uses the same yesNoInProgress response type but
    includes entry scores from -1 through 3, including 0.
-   The Scrum Master 360 contains 9 sections and 19 entries. It uses a
    five-point Likert response (likert5), while the entry score fields
    are all 0.

This is enough to justify separating the response selector from the
scoring algorithm. A selector describes what a respondent can answer. A
scorer describes how those answers become a result.

It is not yet enough to infer the exact aggregation algorithm for every
existing survey. That should be verified against the current scoring
implementation before changing the data.

3. Core Design Principle

The survey should declare what scoring behavior it requires, not how the
F# runtime implements that behavior.

Conceptually:

    Survey Definition
          |
          +-- Questions / Sections
          +-- Answer Selectors
          +-- Scoring Specification
                    |
                    +-- Standard scorer
                    |      -> precompiled F# function
                    |
                    +-- Custom expression
                           -> typed scoring AST
                           -> precompiled F# interpreter

The persisted format should not contain F# function names, CLR type
names, .NET expression-tree serialization, or executable source code.

For example, a future survey might declare:

    scoring:
      type: weighted-progress
      version: 1

The F# runtime owns the mapping from weighted-progress:v1 to the actual
implementation.

This preserves implementation freedom. A scorer can be refactored
internally without changing the survey format, provided its declared
semantics remain stable.

4. Three Levels of Scoring

The design should have three levels rather than only “hardcoded” and
“custom.”

Level 1 - Precompiled Standard Scorers

These are ordinary F# functions compiled into the WASM application.

Potential examples:

-   Sum
-   Average
-   Percentage
-   Likert sum
-   Likert average
-   Weighted Likert
-   Weighted progress
-   Count of selected conditions
-   Highest / lowest
-   Section aggregation

A conceptual F# model:

    type StandardScoring =
        | Sum
        | Average
        | Percentage
        | LikertSum
        | LikertAverage
        | WeightedLikert
        | WeightedProgress

These should be the default path whenever a scoring method is common
enough to have stable semantics and a useful name.

Level 2 - Parameterized Standard Scorers

A standard scorer should not require a new compiled implementation for
every minor variation.

For example, a Likert scorer might be configured with:

-   scale values
-   aggregation method
-   missing-answer policy
-   normalization target
-   section weighting
-   rounding behavior

The behavior remains constrained to a known, tested scorer; the survey
supplies safe configuration data.

This level is important because it should cover most variation without
invoking the custom expression system.

Level 3 - Custom Typed Scoring Expressions

When a survey requires behavior that cannot be represented faithfully by
a standard scorer plus parameters, it can carry a custom scoring
expression.

The expression is data, not executable F#.

The runtime deserializes and validates it into a typed expression tree
and evaluates it with a small interpreter.

Custom expressions are therefore an escape hatch, not the default
scoring mechanism.

5. Why Not Use System.Linq.Expressions Directly?

.NET expression trees inspired the approach, but System.Linq.Expressions
should probably not be the persisted survey language.

There are several reasons:

1.  The application is F# WASM, where runtime code generation is not the
    architecture we want to depend on.
2.  General .NET expression trees expose far more capability than survey
    scoring requires.
3.  Serializing CLR-oriented expression structures couples the survey
    format to implementation details.
4.  A domain-specific AST is easier to validate, version, audit, test,
    and secure.
5.  F# discriminated unions provide a natural representation of the
    legal scoring operations.

The useful idea from expression trees is therefore retained:

  Represent a computation as data, validate it, and evaluate it later.

But the representation should belong to the survey domain.

6. Typed Expression Model

A first conceptual scoring AST might look like:

    type ScoreExpr =
        | Constant of decimal
        | AnswerValue of QuestionId
        | QuestionWeight of QuestionId
        | SectionScore of SectionId

        | Add of ScoreExpr * ScoreExpr
        | Subtract of ScoreExpr * ScoreExpr
        | Multiply of ScoreExpr * ScoreExpr
        | Divide of ScoreExpr * ScoreExpr

        | Sum of ScoreExpr list
        | Average of ScoreExpr list
        | Minimum of ScoreExpr list
        | Maximum of ScoreExpr list

        | If of Condition * ScoreExpr * ScoreExpr

    and Condition =
        | Equals of ValueExpr * ValueExpr
        | GreaterThan of ValueExpr * ValueExpr
        | LessThan of ValueExpr * ValueExpr
        | And of Condition * Condition
        | Or of Condition * Condition
        | Not of Condition

This is illustrative rather than final. Operations should only be added
when a real scoring requirement needs them.

That restraint matters. The goal is not to accidentally create a
general-purpose programming language.

7. Separate Numeric, Boolean, and Answer Types

The first sketch above can be improved further by making invalid
expression combinations difficult to represent.

For example, a condition should not accidentally be usable where a
numeric score is required. Likewise, a textual answer should not
silently participate in arithmetic.

A stronger model could distinguish:

-   numeric expressions
-   boolean conditions
-   answer values
-   question identifiers
-   section identifiers

The exact DU design can be refined during implementation, but the
principle is important: use the F# type system to constrain the scoring
language before evaluation occurs.

This is particularly valuable in WASM because malformed custom rules can
be rejected during survey loading rather than failing deep inside
scoring.

8. Evaluation Context

Expressions should not receive arbitrary access to the application.

They should evaluate against a deliberately constrained context such as:

    type ScoringContext = {
        Survey: SurveyDefinition
        Answers: AnswerMap
        SectionResults: SectionResultMap
    }

The evaluator exposes only domain-approved operations.

A scoring expression should have no direct access to:

-   browser APIs
-   network calls
-   filesystem operations
-   reflection
-   arbitrary .NET methods
-   current time unless explicitly modeled
-   mutable application state

This keeps scoring deterministic and portable.

9. Pure Evaluation

Scoring should ideally be a pure computation:

    SurveyDefinition
        + SurveyResponse
        -> SurveyScore

The same survey and same answers should produce the same score.

Benefits include:

-   reproducible results
-   straightforward unit tests
-   easy regression testing
-   deterministic browser/server parity
-   easier auditing
-   no hidden external dependencies

If a future survey genuinely requires external data, that should be
resolved before scoring and supplied explicitly as input rather than
allowing the scoring expression to perform effects.

10. Validation Before Evaluation

Custom scoring rules should go through a validation phase when the
survey is loaded.

Validation should catch problems such as:

-   unknown question IDs
-   unknown section IDs
-   unsupported expression operations
-   incompatible operand types
-   division by a literal zero
-   invalid or empty aggregations where prohibited
-   references to unavailable answer values
-   unsupported scoring-language versions
-   circular section dependencies if section scores may reference one
    another
-   expressions exceeding complexity limits

This creates a useful lifecycle:

    JSON
      -> deserialize
      -> validate
      -> typed scoring definition
      -> evaluate responses

A malformed survey should fail as an invalid survey definition, not as
an unpredictable scoring failure.

11. Complexity Limits

Because custom expressions come from data, the engine should impose
explicit resource limits.

Possible limits include:

-   maximum expression depth
-   maximum node count
-   maximum number of referenced questions
-   maximum nesting of conditional expressions
-   maximum aggregation size

These are useful even if surveys are trusted. They prevent accidental
pathological rules and make runtime cost more predictable in WASM.

12. Standard Scorer Registry

The runtime needs a stable way to resolve named scorers.

Conceptually:

    weighted-progress:v1 -> scoreWeightedProgressV1
    likert-average:v1    -> scoreLikertAverageV1
    percentage:v1        -> scorePercentageV1

This can be implemented with ordinary F# pattern matching rather than
reflection.

For example:

    type ScoringModel =
        | Standard of StandardScoring
        | Custom of CustomScoringDefinition

    let score model context =
        match model with
        | Standard WeightedProgress ->
            scoreWeightedProgress context

        | Standard LikertAverage ->
            scoreLikertAverage context

        | Custom definition ->
            evaluateCustom definition context

The compiler can then identify non-exhaustive handling as the set of
standard scoring models evolves.

13. Version Scoring Semantics

Scoring is part of the meaning of a completed survey result. Therefore
scoring semantics should be versioned.

For example:

    weighted-progress:v1

should remain stable even if a future:

    weighted-progress:v2

changes treatment of incomplete answers or normalization.

This is especially important when old survey responses may be re-opened
or recalculated later.

The result should be traceable to:

-   survey/template version
-   scoring model
-   scoring model version

The exact persistence format can be decided later.

14. Missing and Invalid Answers Must Be Explicit

A scoring system needs an explicit policy for unanswered, unavailable,
or invalid answers.

Possible semantics include:

-   ignore unanswered questions
-   treat them as zero
-   prohibit scoring until complete
-   calculate a provisional score
-   use a survey-specific default

This should not be an accidental consequence of implementation.

A standard scorer may have a defined default policy, while parameterized
scorers can expose safe alternatives.

Custom expressions should receive an explicit representation of missing
answers rather than silently coercing them to a number.

15. Section Scoring and Overall Scoring

The architecture should allow scoring at more than one level.

A survey may need:

-   question contribution
-   section score
-   overall score
-   normalized score
-   derived dimensions or subscales

These should be modeled deliberately rather than assuming every survey
produces one scalar total.

A useful future result type may resemble:

    type SurveyScore = {
        Overall: decimal option
        Sections: Map<SectionId, decimal>
        Dimensions: Map<DimensionId, decimal>
    }

This is only a conceptual shape. The important point is that the scoring
engine should not unnecessarily constrain future assessments to a single
number.

16. Separate Scoring From Interpretation

Calculating a score and interpreting a score are different concerns.

For example:

    raw score = 47

may later be interpreted as:

    0-20  -> At Risk
    21-40 -> Developing
    41-60 -> Established
    61-80 -> Advanced
    81+   -> Optimized

Changing those labels or thresholds should not necessarily change the
underlying scoring algorithm.

The architecture should therefore consider separate concepts for:

1.  scoring - deriving numeric or dimensional results
2.  interpretation - converting those results into bands, labels,
    messages, or classifications

Range interpretation itself is a good candidate for a precompiled
standard capability.

17. Separate Answer Selectors From Scoring

The current surveys reinforce another important distinction.

yesNoInProgress and likert5 describe how answers are represented and
displayed. They do not, by themselves, define the entire scoring
algorithm.

A selector should answer questions such as:

-   what choices exist?
-   what value is stored?
-   how is it rendered?

A scorer should answer:

-   how does the stored response contribute to a result?
-   how are question contributions aggregated?
-   how are sections weighted?
-   how are missing answers handled?

Keeping these concerns separate prevents UI vocabulary from becoming
scoring logic.

18. Custom Rule Example

A future custom survey might require:

-   Q1 = Yes adds 10.
-   Q2 and Q3 = Always adds 15.
-   Q7 = No caps the result at 50.
-   Q9 only contributes if Q8 = Yes.

That could be represented as a typed tree roughly equivalent to:

    Minimum(
        If(Q7 = No, 50, unlimited),
        Add(
            If(Q1 = Yes, 10, 0),
            If(Q2 = Always AND Q3 = Always, 15, 0),
            If(Q8 = Yes, QuestionScore(Q9), 0)
        )
    )

The persisted JSON representation can be designed later. The domain AST
should be designed first.

19. Why the Domain AST Should Come Before the JSON

The JSON is a serialization format, not the domain model.

Designing the JSON first risks letting convenient JSON shapes dictate
the semantics of the scoring language.

A better sequence is:

1.  Identify required scoring capabilities.
2.  Design the F# domain types.
3.  Define validation rules and semantics.
4.  Define the evaluator.
5.  Create the JSON representation that maps cleanly into those types.

This is also why the current survey files should not be rearranged yet.

20. Migration Strategy for Existing Surveys

Do not immediately rewrite the four current survey files.

First:

1.  Locate and document the current scoring implementation.
2.  Build characterization tests using existing survey definitions and
    known answer sets.
3.  Identify the actual algorithms used by each survey family.
4.  Determine which algorithms deserve named standard scorers.
5.  Implement those scorers in F#.
6.  Run the same answer sets through old and new implementations.
7.  Require identical results unless an intentional scoring change is
    separately approved.
8.  Only then decide whether the JSON should be rearranged.

This protects existing scoring semantics while allowing the architecture
to improve underneath them.

21. Testing Strategy

Every standard scorer should have direct unit tests.

Every custom AST operation should have evaluator tests.

More importantly, the engine should support table-driven scoring
fixtures:

    survey + answers + expected result

These fixtures can test:

-   standard scorers
-   custom rules
-   missing-answer policies
-   boundaries
-   negative values
-   normalization
-   section aggregation
-   interpretation ranges

For migrated surveys, fixtures should function as compatibility tests.

Property-based testing is also attractive for pure scorers. Examples
include:

-   percentage outputs stay within declared bounds
-   averages stay between valid minimum and maximum answer values
-   adding an ignored unanswered question does not change a score
-   normalization preserves ordering where the scorer promises
    monotonicity

The exact properties depend on each scorer’s semantics.

22. Diagnostics and Explainability

A scoring engine should consider returning an optional explanation trace
in addition to the final number.

For example:

    Team Structure
      Q0: No -> contribution -1
      Q1: Yes -> contribution -1
      Q2: In Progress -> contribution 0.5
      Section total -> 6.5

This is useful for:

-   debugging survey definitions
-   validating migrations
-   authoring custom rules
-   explaining results
-   support and auditability

The production UI does not have to expose this trace to respondents. It
can be an engine capability used by tests, authoring tools, or
diagnostics.

A strong design is for tracing to observe the same evaluation rather
than maintain a separate scoring implementation.

23. Authoring Implications

Eventually, survey authors should not need to manually construct
expression-tree JSON.

An authoring tool can offer:

-   choose a standard scoring model
-   configure allowed parameters
-   preview results
-   build advanced conditions visually
-   validate custom rules
-   run sample responses
-   show a scoring explanation

The typed AST becomes the common internal representation behind that
authoring experience.

This is another reason to keep the language small and domain-specific.

24. Performance in WASM

The common path should be very inexpensive because standard scorers are
ordinary compiled F#.

Custom scoring adds interpretation overhead, but survey scoring
expressions should be small relative to typical application workloads.

Performance priorities should therefore be:

1.  make standard scoring fast and direct
2.  validate custom rules once when the survey is loaded
3.  avoid repeatedly parsing JSON during scoring
4.  evaluate an already typed/validated representation
5.  consider memoizing derived section values if expressions reuse them

Runtime code generation is unnecessary.

25. Security and Trust Boundary

Even if Echelon controls survey definitions today, the scoring format
should be treated as data crossing a trust boundary.

The rule system should never allow a survey to invoke arbitrary CLR
methods.

The legal operations are exactly those represented by the scoring
domain.

This produces a useful security property:

  A survey can choose among scoring behaviors the engine explicitly
  permits, but it cannot acquire new application capabilities.

That is much safer than storing scripts, snippets of F#, or general
expression-tree calls.

26. Error Model

Scoring errors should be domain errors rather than exceptions wherever
practical.

Potential errors include:

    UnknownQuestion
    UnknownSection
    UnsupportedScoringVersion
    InvalidExpression
    MissingRequiredAnswer
    DivisionByZero
    CircularDependency
    ExpressionTooComplex

The public evaluator can return a result type such as:

    Result<SurveyScore, ScoringError list>

The exact types can evolve, but failures should remain explicit.

27. Recommended Boundary Between Standard and Custom

A useful rule:

  If a scoring method is common enough to have a stable name and
  semantics, implement it as a standard precompiled scorer.

Use custom expressions when the behavior is genuinely survey-specific.

If the same custom expression pattern appears repeatedly, that is
evidence that it should be promoted into a new standard scorer or a
parameterized capability.

This lets the scoring system evolve toward the simplest representation
of actual usage.

28. What Not to Build

Avoid:

-   arbitrary F# stored in JSON
-   C# stored in JSON
-   JavaScript scoring snippets
-   runtime source compilation
-   reflection-based arbitrary method invocation
-   serialized System.Linq.Expressions as the public survey language
-   one bespoke compiled scorer for every survey
-   one giant universal custom-rule interpreter used even for trivial
    sums and averages
-   coupling selector names directly to one scoring algorithm

Each of these either increases risk, implementation coupling, or
unnecessary complexity.

29. Proposed Architecture

The complete conceptual flow is:

    Survey JSON
        |
        v
    Deserialize
        |
        v
    Survey Definition
        |
        +-------------------------------+
        |                               |
        v                               v
    Answer/Selector Model          Scoring Specification
                                        |
                              +---------+---------+
                              |                   |
                              v                   v
                         Standard             Custom
                         Scoring              Expression
                              |                   |
                              v                   v
                      Precompiled F#        Validate AST
                          scorer                 |
                              |                  v
                              |            Typed AST
                              |                  |
                              |                  v
                              |           F# Interpreter
                              |                  |
                              +---------+--------+
                                        |
                                        v
                                  SurveyScore
                                        |
                              +---------+---------+
                              |                   |
                              v                   v
                         Interpretation       Diagnostics
                              |
                              v
                        Display Result

Everything that executes is compiled into the F# WASM application. The
only dynamic element is the safe data describing which permitted scoring
operations should be applied.

30. Initial Implementation Direction

A sensible implementation sequence is:

Phase 1 - Characterize existing behavior - Find the current scoring
algorithms. - Create compatibility fixtures. - Do not change existing
JSON.

Phase 2 - Define the scoring domain - Define IDs and answer-value
types. - Define ScoringModel. - Define the initial standard scorer
set. - Define scoring result and error types.

Phase 3 - Implement standard scorers - Implement only the scorers
required by existing surveys first. - Verify compatibility against the
fixtures.

Phase 4 - Define the custom expression AST - Start with the smallest
operation set justified by known requirements. - Implement validation
and pure evaluation. - Add complexity limits.

Phase 5 - Serialization - Design the survey JSON representation around
the proven F# model. - Add explicit scoring-language/scorer versions.

Phase 6 - Interpretation and diagnostics - Add result
bands/classifications separately. - Add optional contribution traces for
authoring and testing.

Phase 7 - Authoring support - Standard scorer selection first. - Custom
rule building only as an advanced capability.

31. Open Questions

These should be answered before finalizing the model:

1.  What exact formulas are used by the current Agile and Scrum Master
    360 implementations?
2.  Does score currently represent a question weight, a maturity level,
    a direct contribution, or something else?
3.  How does yesNoInProgress transform an entry’s score?
4.  How are unanswered questions treated?
5.  Are sections independently scored and then aggregated?
6.  Are section weights needed?
7.  Are scores normalized?
8.  Can a survey produce multiple dimensions rather than one overall
    score?
9.  Must historical results always be exactly reproducible?
10. Can survey templates change after responses have been
    encoded/stored?
11. Will custom scoring be authored only by Echelon or eventually by
    external survey authors?
12. What level of scoring explanation should be available to authors and
    respondents?

These are domain questions. They should drive the final AST rather than
adding speculative language features.

32. Summary Decision

Use a hybrid scoring architecture for the F# WASM survey engine.

-   Precompile common scoring algorithms as ordinary F#.
-   Parameterize those algorithms where safe configuration covers common
    variation.
-   Represent exceptional custom scoring as a small domain-specific
    expression tree.
-   Deserialize and validate custom rules into strongly typed F#
    structures.
-   Interpret those structures using precompiled pure F# functions.
-   Keep arbitrary executable code out of survey definitions.
-   Separate selectors, scoring, and score interpretation.
-   Version scoring semantics.
-   Preserve existing survey behavior through characterization tests
    before restructuring current JSON.
-   Promote repeated custom patterns into standard scorers over time.

The central idea is:

    Known behavior -> compiled F#
    Common variation -> declarative parameters
    Survey-specific behavior -> constrained typed expression data
    Arbitrary code -> not allowed

This retains the flexibility that motivated expression trees while
fitting F# WebAssembly, strong typing, deterministic execution, and a
survey format that can remain independent of the implementation
language.

---

Requirements Migration Traceability (appended 2026-08-31)

Requirements-definition status: COMPLETED

The original source above is preserved verbatim. Original line references below use the pre-append file. Every actionable or normative statement, listed invariant, required field, validation rule, and test obligation in each range is represented by the mapped ROS work item(s). Implementation remains pending.

| Requirement group | Exact source section/requirement | Original lines | ROS work item(s) |
|---|---|---:|---|
| AST-001 | §§1–5, Purpose through Why Not Use System.Linq.Expressions Directly | 9–175 | WI-0007, WI-0010 |
| AST-002 | §§6–11, Typed Expression Model through Complexity Limits | 177–331 | WI-0007, WI-0010 |
| AST-003 | §§12–17, Standard Scorer Registry through Separate Answer Selectors From Scoring | 333–490 | WI-0007 |
| AST-004 | §§18–21, Custom Rule Example through Testing Strategy | 492–585 | WI-0007, WI-0010 |
| AST-005 | §§22–28, Diagnostics and Explainability through What Not to Build | 587–726 | WI-0003, WI-0007, WI-0010 |
| AST-006 | §§29–32, Proposed Architecture through Summary Decision | 728–862 | WI-0002, WI-0007, WI-0010 |

Reciprocal detail: .ros/work/items/WI-0002.md through WI-0010.md
Complete migration ledger: docs/requirements/survey-engine-requirements-migration.md
